# Developer documentation

## IDE setup

For the global project, Visual Studio Code. Recommended extensions:
- GitLens
- Markdown Preview Mermaid
- Mermaid Markdown Syntax Highlighting

For the script-server (Kotlin code), IntelliJ Idea. Note that on Linux there will be an ownership conflict between gradle files generated by the development docker and those from the IDE. To solve this, make sure to stop the dockers and run `sudo chown -R <yourinfo>:<yourinfo> . ` before running the tests in IntelliJ.

## Launching the dockers in development mode
`docker compose -f compose.yml -f compose.dev.yml build`

`docker compose -f compose.yml -f compose.dev.yml up`

This command enables:
- OpenAPI editor at http://localhost/swagger/
- UI server: React automatic hot-swapping
- Script-server: Kotlin hot-swapping by launching [./script-server/hotswap.sh](../script-server/hotswap.sh)
- NGINX: [http-proxy/conf.d/ngnix.conf](../http-proxy/conf.d/ngnix.conf) will be loaded

Once in a while you should use `docker compose -f compose.yml -f compose.dev.yml pull` to have the latest base images.

## Microservice infrastructure

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    state "script-server" as script
    state "scripts (static)" as scripts
    state "output (static)" as output
    state "R runner" as r
    state "Julia runner" as julia

    [*] --> ngnix
    ngnix --> ui
    ngnix --> script
    ngnix --> output
    script --> scripts
    script --> r
    script --> julia
```

- ui: React front-end
- script-server: Running scripts and pipeline orchestration
- R runner: Docker dedicated to runs R code, with most relevant packages pre-installed
- Julia runner: Docker dedicated to runs Julia code

In addition to these services, 
- [scripts](../scripts/) folder contains all the scripts that can be run.
- [output](../output/) folder contains all scripts result.

## Script lifecycle & artifacts
```mermaid
flowchart TD
 never[Never ran] --> running[Running]
 running --> input[(- run folder\n- input.json)]
 running --> log[(log file)]
 running --> success{Success?}
 success --> |Yes| Done
 Done --> output[(output.json)]
 success --> |No| Failed
 Failed --> |Add error flag|output
```

## OpenAPI specification

The [OpenApi specification file](../script-server/api/openapi.yaml) is used by the UI to launch runs and track them until completion.

### Single-script scenario
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    ui->>script_server: script/list
    script_server-->>ui: 

    ui->>script_server: script/info
    script_server-->>ui: 

    ui->>script_server: script/run
    script_server->>script: 
    script-->>script_server: output.json
    Note left of ui: Currently 1h timeout.<br/>Using a job id necessary for long operations.
    script_server-->>ui: output + logs
```

### Pipeline scenario
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    ui->>script_server: pipeline/list
    script_server-->>ui: 

    ui->>script_server: pipeline/<path>/info
    script_server-->>ui: 

    ui->>script_server: pipeline/<path>/run
    script_server-->>ui: id
    loop For each step
        script_server->>script: run
        Note right of script: 1h timeout for individual script
        script-->>script_server: output.json (script)
        ui->>script_server: pipeline/<id>/outputs
        script_server-->>ui: output.json (pipeline)
    end

```

Every second, the UI polls for:
- output.json from the pipeline, to get the output folders of individual scripts. Stops polling when pipeline stops.
- logs.txt of individual scripts, for realtime logging, only if log section is opened. Stops when individual script completes, or when log section closed.
- output.json of individual scripts, to know when script completes and display its outputs. Stops when script stops.


### Editing the OpenAPI specification of the script-server
1. Using http://localhost/swagger, edit the specification.
2. Copy the result to [script-server/api/openapi.yaml](../script-server/api/openapi.yaml)
3. Use [ui/BonInABoxScriptService/generate-client.sh](../ui/BonInABoxScriptService/generate-client.sh) and  [script-server/generate-server-openapitools.sh](../script-server/generate-server-openapitools.sh) to regenerate the client and the server.
4. Merge carefully, not all generated code is to be kept.
5. Implement the gaps.

## Debugging signal forwarding
Since runner-r and runner-julia run in a separate docker, when the user stops the pipeline, the signal must go from the script-server, to the runner, to the running script. Docker does not allow this by default, this is why we use docker-exec-sigproxy.

In case stop feature seems not to work, we can test that the signal is properly forwarded in an environment with the following:

1. Launch the server as usual (up)
2. Open a shell in the script-server `docker exec -it biab-script-server bash`
3. In the script-server, launch a signal trap on the runner and let it complete

    `/root/docker-exec-sigproxy exec -i biab-runner-r bash -c "trap \"echo 'trapped SIGINT' | tee -a /output/trapped; exit 1;\" INT; echo 'start' | tee -a /output/trapped; for i in {1..5}; do sleep 1; echo 'tick' | tee -a /output/trapped; done; echo 'stop' | tee -a /output/trapped"`

    This will echo the following to the console and to /output/trapped:
    ```
    start
    tick
    tick
    tick
    tick
    tick
    stop
    ```

4. Run the command once more but quickly hit ctrl+c to interrupt (SIGINT). You should have something like that:
    ```
    start
    tick
    tick
    trapped SIGINT
    ```

### Further debugging
You can uncomment `#define DEBUG (1)` in [docker-exec-sigproxy.c](./script-server/docker-exec-sigproxy.c).

Recompile it by installing gcc on the script-server dev docker and run

`RUN gcc -Wall -O2 -o /root/docker-exec-sigproxy docker-exec-sigproxy.c`